##Methods###Fish Field SamplingSampling for wild juvenile Coho salmon took place at 4 different streams throughout the Puget Sound region. Stream selection criteria was based on land use within each watershed and spanned a gradient from low to high anthropogenic impact as defined by land area within a watershed designated as urban. For the purpose of next-generation sequencing, the four sites that were sampled included Swamp Creek (88.2% urban), Jenkins Creek (65.9% urban), Issaquah Creek (16% urban), and Coulter Creek (4% Urban). Each stream was sampled for fish along a 150-meter reach. Double-pass backpack electroshocking was used once in the upstream and once in the downstream direction to stun and capture fish alive. All captured fish were retained in aerated buckets until processing could take place. Ten coho from each stream were subsampled; sizes of subsampled fish for lethal takes were representative of the range observed in all salmonids sampled in the reach. These ten fish were euthanized with blunt trauma and livers immediately excised, placed in RNAlater and stored on wet ice until they could be placed in a freezer. Liver samples were preserved for longterm storage in RNAlater at -20 deg C.###RNA Isolation and SequencingImmediately upon removal from the freezer livers were transferred into 1.5mL snap-tubes for tissue homogenization. Tissues were homogenized using Teflon pestles in RNAzol RT solution. Manufacture’s protocols were used to isolate total RNA from each of the livers using RNAzol RT (Molecular Research Center Inc. 2015). Once isolated RNA was dissolved in 50uL of .1% DEPC treated water. Concentrations and quality were checked using a Nanodrop, and further treated with Turbo DNA-free to remove genomic DNA contamination. DNase'd samples were diluted to 100ng/L and transferred to the University of Washington Genomics facility for library preparation and sequencing. All RNA samples were run on an Aligent Bioanalyzer 2100 to check for degradation and had a RIN >8. Libraries were created with an Illumina RNA TrueSeq kit. Insert sizes were less than 300 base pairs, multiplexed with unique barcodes and run over 4 lanes on an Illumina NextSeq500.###Data AnalysisA full summary of the data analysis is available for download from [github](github.com/aspanjer/RNAseq_Coho), including all code used in the quality control, transcriptome assembly, differential expression analysis, and gene ontology analysis. Raw sequencing files are available on request and all analysis should be reproducible with these files and scripts. A summary of this analysis follows. ###Transcriptome AssemblyRaw files were combined for each individual across the 4 lanes of sequencing resulting in two fastq files for each individual, one for each read direction. These FASTQ files were checked for quality with FastQC v0.11.5 and parsed with Trim Galore! v.0.4.2 to remove adapter sequences and errant reads. Only paired reads were retained after trimming. Trimmed files for each individual were retained for later differential expression analysis. All forward and reverse read files were concatenated together into two files for the entire sequencing set. Trinity v 2.06 (Grabherr et al. 2011) was used on the National Center for Genome Analysis Support [galaxy server](https://galaxy.ncgas-trinity.indiana.edu) to assemble the transcriptome. ###AnnotationSequencing data was aligned using BLASTx using the full Swiss-Prot database downloaded from the NCBI servers ([NCBI ftp server](ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast/)). The search was limited to the single closest match for each contig. The resulting uniprot accession codes were used for downstream functional analysis. ###Differential Expression AnalysisReads for each contig for each individual fish were quantified by pseudoaligning back to the assembled transcriptome using kallisto v0.43.0 (Bray et. al 2016). These counts for each individual were assembled together into a count matrix and analyzed for differential expression between streams using the DESeq2 (Love et al. 2014) package in R v3.3.2 (R Core Team 2016). Individuals were considered as biological replicates if they originated from the same stream. As part of the DESeq2 pipeline counts in each individual library are normalized based on sequencing depth and a negative binomial generalized linear model is used to test for differential expression. All pairwise comparisons for subsequent analysis were made against Coulter creek that is considered a reference site for this analysis. Results were considered significant if the adjusted p-value <=.05 for differential expression analysis. ###Gene OntologyEnrichment analysis was performed to determine functional overrepresentation in differentially expressed genes (DEGs) for each of the three pairwise comparisons (padj <=.1). Uniprot accession codes were uploaded to the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery, [DAVID] (https://david.ncifcrf.gov), for all annotated genes in the transcriptome as background to determine enrichment in each DEG set. Accession codes for pairwise comparisons were uploaded as gene lists and enriched functional annotations sets retrieved. These results were further visualized using Reduce and Visualize Gene Ontology, [REVIGO](http://revigo.irb.hr),. Figures for these analyses were produced in R with tables retrieved from their respective websites.  ##Results###Transcriptome and AnnotationThe NextSeq500 produced >400 million paired reads across 4 lanes of sequencing. The trinity assembly produced ~356k contigs with a mean length of 824 nt and a total length of 293,356,238 nt (Table 1). 303,905 contigs were annotated, with 123,068k unique annotations. ###Differential Expression Analysis and Gene Ontology AnalysisFigure 1 shows un-normalized count data across all individuals oriented using principal component analysis. Although less than 10% of variation across samples is explained by the first two axis, the separation of individuals by site suggests that environmental conditions unique to each sampling location is impacting differential expression. Differential expression varied by pairwise comparison as well (Fig 2). As compared to Coulter creek, Issaquah creek had 1169 DEGs (700 down-regulated and 469 up-regulated), Jenkins creek had 188 DEGs (102 down-regulated and 86 up-regulated), and Swamp creek 850 DEGs (355 down-regulated and 495 up-regulated).  Figure 3 shows the comparison of down- and up- regulated DEGs across all sites and suggests that Jenkins and Swamp, the two urbanized sites, cluster closer together based on DEGs. Functional analysis of DEGs showed a wide range of functional enrichment across the stream sites. The top 15 enriched terms for each of the three Gene Ontology categories are shown in figures 4-6 for each site.  For the Issaquah v. Coulter comparison, genes involved in “immune response” and “oxidation-reduction process” topped the biological process enrichment list; for Jenkins vs. Coulter genes involved in “oxidation-reduction,” “transport”, “mRNA” processing topped the biological process enrichment list; and Similarly for Swamp v. Coulter, “oxidation-reduction” was at the top with “metabolic” processes following. A reduced visualization of all enriched GO terms is presented in figure 7. ##ReferencesGrabherr, Manfred G., et al. "Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data without a reference genome." Nature biotechnology 29.7 (2011): 644-652.Afgan, Enis, et al. "The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and collaborative biomedical analyses: 2016 update." Nucleic acids research (2016): gkw343.Bray, Nicolas L., et al. "Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification." Nature biotechnology 34.5 (2016): 525-527.Ewels, Philip, et al. "MultiQC: summarize analysis results for multiple tools and samples in a single report." Bioinformatics 32.19 (2016): 3047-3048.Bolger, Anthony M., Marc Lohse, and Bjoern Usadel. "Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence data." Bioinformatics (2014): btu170.Huang, Da Wei, Brad T. Sherman, and Richard A. Lempicki. "Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID bioinformatics resources." Nature protocols 4.1 (2009): 44-57.Supek, Fran, et al. "REVIGO summarizes and visualizes long lists of gene ontology terms." PloS one 6.7 (2011): e21800.Team, R. Core. "R: A language and environment for statistical computing." (2013): 409.Love, Michael, Simon Anders, and Wolfgang Huber. "Differential analysis of count data–the DESeq2 package." Genome Biology 15 (2014): 550.Wickham, Hadley, and Winston Chang. "ggplot2: An implementation of the Grammar of Graphics. R package version 0.8. 3." (2009).Smith-Unna, Richard, et al. "TransRate: reference free quality assessment of de novo transcriptome assemblies." Genome research (2016): gr-196469.